BIMM 143
Find-A-Gene Project

[Q1] Tell me the name of a protein you are interested in. Include the species and the accession number. This can be a human protein or a protein from any other species as long as its function is known. If you do not have a favorite protein, select human RBP4 or KIF11. Do not use beta globin as this is in the worked example report that I provide you with online. 

I am interested in studying the retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4), specifically isoform b, which is a transporter protein that is involved in binding and transporting vitamin A (i.e. retinol) from the liver to other tissues. This protein is found in humans (Homo sapiens) and its accession number from RefSeq is NP_001310447.1. 
Link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/NP_001310447.1 



[Q2] Perform a BLAST search against a DNA database, such as a database consisting of genomic DNA or ESTs. The BLAST server can be at NCBI or elsewhere. Include details of the BLAST method used, database searched and any limits applied (e.g. Organism). Also include the output of that BLAST search in your document. If appropriate, change the font to Courier size 10 so that the results are displayed neatly. You can also screen capture a BLAST output (e.g. alt print screen on a PC or on a MAC press ⌘-shift-4. The pointer becomes a bulls eye. Select the area you wish to capture and release. The image is saved as a file called Screen Shot [].png in your Desktop directory). It is not necessary to print out all of the blast results if there are many pages. On the BLAST results, clearly indicate a match that represents a protein sequence, encoded from some DNA sequence, that is homologous to your query protein. I need to be able to inspect the pairwise alignment you have selected, including the E value and score. It should be labeled a "genomic clone" or "mRNA sequence", etc. - but include no functional annotation. In general, [Q2] is the most difficult for students because it requires you to have a “feel” for how to interpret BLAST results. You need to distinguish between a perfect match to your query (i.e. a sequence that is not “novel”), a near match (something that might be “novel”, depending on the results of [Q4]), and a non-homologous result. If you are having trouble finding a novel gene try restricting your search to an organism that is poorly annotated. 

I used NCBI BLAST, specifically tblastn, to find genes relating to the RBP 4 [Homo sapiens] (NP_001310447.1) with the organism set to frogs and toads (taxid: 8342). The database I searched was the nucleotide collection (nt) database. The top hit was Spea bombifrons retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4), mRNA, which corresponds to Spea bombifrons (plains spadefoot toad), has a query cover of 87%, an E-value of 2e-94, a percent identity of 72.99%, and the accession number XM_053450970.1. Screenshots are attached with results from the BLAST search:



[Q3] Gather information about this “novel” protein. At a minimum, show me the protein sequence of the “novel” protein as displayed in your BLAST results from [Q2] as FASTA format (you can copy and paste the aligned sequence subject lines from your BLAST result page if necessary) or translate your novel DNA sequence using a tool called EMBOSS Transeq at the EBI. Don’t forget to translate all six reading frames; the ORF (open reading frame) is likely to be the longest sequence without a stop codon. It may not start with a methionine if you don’t have the complete coding region. Make sure the sequence you provide includes a header/subject line and is in traditional FASTA format. Here, tell me the name of the novel protein, and the species from which it derives. It is very unlikely (but still definitely possible) that you will find a novel gene from an organism such as S. cerevisiae, human or mouse, because those genomes have already been thoroughly annotated. It is more likely that you will discover a new gene in a genome that is currently being sequenced, such as bacteria or plants or protozoa. 
The protein I found is from humans (Homo sapiens) and is called retinol-binding protein 4 isoform a precursor. The accession ID is NP_006735.2.

>XM_053450970.1 PREDICTED: Spea bombifrons retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4), mRNA

RDCRVDNFRVKQDFDKNRYAGTWYAVAKKDPQGLFLLDNIVAQFSVDENGKMTATAKGRVIILQTVELCADMVGTFRETNDPAKFKMKYYGLLSYLEKGLDDHWVVDTDYDTYAIHYSCRKLNADNTCEDSYSFVFSRDPKGLTPEAQRIVRRRQEELCLDRKYRVVEHNGFCD



[Q4] Prove that this gene, and its corresponding protein, are novel. For the purposes of this project, “novel” is defined as follows. Take the protein sequence (your answer to [Q3]), and use it as a query in a blastp search of the nr database at NCBI. • If there is a match with 100% amino acid identity to a protein in the database, from the same species, then your protein is NOT novel (even if the match is to a protein with a name such as “unknown”). Someone has already found and annotated this sequence, and assigned it an accession number. • If the top match reported has less than 100% identity, then it is likely that your protein is novel, and you have succeeded. • If there is a match with 100% identity, but to a different species than the one you started with, then you have likely succeeded in finding a novel gene. • If there are no database matches to the original query from [Q1], this indicates that you have partially succeeded: yes, you may have found a new gene, but no, it is not actually homologous to the original query. You should probably start over.

Since my top hit (retinol-binding protein 4 isoform a precursor [Homo sapiens]) has a percent identity of 72.99%, it is novel. Therefore, we have succeeded at identifying a novel protein.